<!DOCTYPE html>

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
  <head>
    <meta charset="utf-8" />
    <meta name="viewport" content="width=device-width, initial-scale=1.0" /><meta name="generator" content="Docutils 0.19: https://docutils.sourceforge.io/" />

    <title>FAT32 Support</title>
    <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../_static/pygments.css" />
    <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../_static/epub.css" /> 
  </head><body>

    <div class="document">
      <div class="documentwrapper">
          <div class="body" role="main">
            
  <section id="fat32-support">
<h1>FAT32 Support</h1>
<p>zeptoforth includes FAT32 filesystem support combined with MBR partition table support on devices implementing the <code class="docutils literal notranslate"><span class="pre">&lt;block-dev&gt;</span></code> class defined in the module <code class="docutils literal notranslate"><span class="pre">block-dev</span></code> (currently only the <code class="docutils literal notranslate"><span class="pre">&lt;sd&gt;</span></code> class defined in the module <code class="docutils literal notranslate"><span class="pre">sd</span></code>). It supports creating files and directories, reading files and directories, writing files and (indirectly) directories, seeking in files, removing files and (empty) directories, and renaming (but currently not moving) files and directories. It also supports parsing paths within filesystems. It supports reading partition table entries from the MBR, and uses these when initializing FAT32 filesystems.</p>
<p>Note that, prior to zeptoforth 1.7.0, files and directories did not need closing; it was merely up to the user to not carry out operations such as removing them and then carrying out other operations on them afterwards. This has changed; now files need to be closed with <code class="docutils literal notranslate"><span class="pre">close-file</span></code> and directories need to be closed with <code class="docutils literal notranslate"><span class="pre">close-dir</span></code>, followed by being destroyed with <code class="docutils literal notranslate"><span class="pre">destroy</span></code>, once one is done with them. Not doing so may result in undefined behavior, particularly if the space they occupied in RAM is reused afterwards.</p>
<section id="fat32">
<h2><code class="docutils literal notranslate"><span class="pre">fat32</span></code></h2>
<p>The <code class="docutils literal notranslate"><span class="pre">fat32</span></code> module contains the following words:</p>
<section id="x-sector-size-not-supported">
<h3><code class="docutils literal notranslate"><span class="pre">x-sector-size-not-supported</span></code></h3>
<p>( – )</p>
<p>Sector size exception.</p>
</section>
<section id="x-fs-version-not-supported">
<h3><code class="docutils literal notranslate"><span class="pre">x-fs-version-not-supported</span></code></h3>
<p>( – )</p>
<p>Filesystem version not supported exception.</p>
</section>
<section id="x-bad-info-sector">
<h3><code class="docutils literal notranslate"><span class="pre">x-bad-info-sector</span></code></h3>
<p>( – )</p>
<p>Bad info sector exception.</p>
</section>
<section id="x-no-clusters-free">
<h3><code class="docutils literal notranslate"><span class="pre">x-no-clusters-free</span></code></h3>
<p>( – )</p>
<p>No clusters free exception.</p>
</section>
<section id="x-file-name-format">
<h3><code class="docutils literal notranslate"><span class="pre">x-file-name-format</span></code></h3>
<p>( – )</p>
<p>Unsupported file name format exception.</p>
</section>
<section id="x-out-of-range-entry">
<h3><code class="docutils literal notranslate"><span class="pre">x-out-of-range-entry</span></code></h3>
<p>( – )</p>
<p>Out of range directory entry index exception.</p>
</section>
<section id="x-out-of-range-partition">
<h3><code class="docutils literal notranslate"><span class="pre">x-out-of-range-partition</span></code></h3>
<p>( – )</p>
<p>Out of range partition index exception.</p>
</section>
<section id="x-entry-not-found">
<h3><code class="docutils literal notranslate"><span class="pre">x-entry-not-found</span></code></h3>
<p>( – )</p>
<p>Directory entry not found exception.</p>
</section>
<section id="x-entry-already-exists">
<h3><code class="docutils literal notranslate"><span class="pre">x-entry-already-exists</span></code></h3>
<p>( – )</p>
<p>Directory entry already exists exception.</p>
</section>
<section id="x-entry-not-file">
<h3><code class="docutils literal notranslate"><span class="pre">x-entry-not-file</span></code></h3>
<p>( – )</p>
<p>Directory entry is not a file exception.</p>
</section>
<section id="x-entry-not-dir">
<h3><code class="docutils literal notranslate"><span class="pre">x-entry-not-dir</span></code></h3>
<p>( – )</p>
<p>Directory entry is not a directory exception.</p>
</section>
<section id="x-dir-is-not-empty">
<h3><code class="docutils literal notranslate"><span class="pre">x-dir-is-not-empty</span></code></h3>
<p>( – )</p>
<p>Directory is not empty exception.</p>
</section>
<section id="x-forbidden-dir">
<h3><code class="docutils literal notranslate"><span class="pre">x-forbidden-dir</span></code></h3>
<p>( – )</p>
<p>Directory name being changed or set is forbidden exception.</p>
</section>
<section id="x-empty-path">
<h3><code class="docutils literal notranslate"><span class="pre">x-empty-path</span></code></h3>
<p>( – )</p>
<p>No file or directory referred to in path within directory exception.</p>
</section>
<section id="x-invalid-path">
<h3><code class="docutils literal notranslate"><span class="pre">x-invalid-path</span></code></h3>
<p>( – )</p>
<p>Invalid path exception.</p>
</section>
<section id="x-not-open">
<h3><code class="docutils literal notranslate"><span class="pre">x-not-open</span></code></h3>
<p>( – )</p>
<p>Attempted to carry out an operation on a file or directory that is not open.</p>
</section>
<section id="x-shared-file">
<h3><code class="docutils literal notranslate"><span class="pre">x-shared-file</span></code></h3>
<p>( – )</p>
<p>Attempted to carry out an operation on a file where the file must only be open once (i.e. truncate a file).</p>
</section>
<section id="x-open">
<h3><code class="docutils literal notranslate"><span class="pre">x-open</span></code></h3>
<p>( – )</p>
<p>Attempted to carry out an operation on a file or directory that is open (i.e. remove a file or directory).</p>
</section>
<section id="seek-set">
<h3><code class="docutils literal notranslate"><span class="pre">seek-set</span></code></h3>
<p>( – whence )</p>
<p>Seek from the beginning of a file.</p>
</section>
<section id="seek-cur">
<h3><code class="docutils literal notranslate"><span class="pre">seek-cur</span></code></h3>
<p>( – whence )</p>
<p>Seek from the current position in a file</p>
</section>
<section id="seek-end">
<h3><code class="docutils literal notranslate"><span class="pre">seek-end</span></code></h3>
<p>( – whence )</p>
</section>
<section id="mbr">
<h3><code class="docutils literal notranslate"><span class="pre">&lt;mbr&gt;</span></code></h3>
<p>The master boot record class. This class is used to read a partition entry from for initializing a FAT32 filesystem.</p>
<p>The <code class="docutils literal notranslate"><span class="pre">&lt;mbr&gt;</span></code> class includes the following constructor:</p>
</section>
<section id="new">
<h3><code class="docutils literal notranslate"><span class="pre">new</span></code></h3>
<p>( mbr-device mbr – )</p>
<p>Construct an <code class="docutils literal notranslate"><span class="pre">&lt;mbr&gt;</span></code> instance with the block device <em>mbr-device</em>.</p>
<p>The <code class="docutils literal notranslate"><span class="pre">&lt;mbr&gt;</span></code> class includes the following methods:</p>
</section>
<section id="mbr-valid">
<h3><code class="docutils literal notranslate"><span class="pre">mbr-valid?</span></code></h3>
<p>( mbr – valid? )</p>
<p>Is the MBR valid?</p>
</section>
<section id="partition">
<h3><code class="docutils literal notranslate"><span class="pre">partition&#64;</span></code></h3>
<p>( partition index mbr – )</p>
<p>Read a partition entry, with an index from 0 to 3.</p>
</section>
<section id="id1">
<h3><code class="docutils literal notranslate"><span class="pre">partition!</span></code></h3>
<p>( partition index mbr – )</p>
<p>Write a partition entry, with an index from 0 to 3.</p>
</section>
<section id="id2">
<h3><code class="docutils literal notranslate"><span class="pre">&lt;partition&gt;</span></code></h3>
<p>The master boot record partition entry class. This class is used to read partition entries from the MBR partition table for initializing FAT32 filesystems.</p>
<p>The <code class="docutils literal notranslate"><span class="pre">&lt;partition&gt;</span></code> class includes the following members:</p>
</section>
<section id="partition-active">
<h3><code class="docutils literal notranslate"><span class="pre">partition-active</span></code></h3>
<p>( partition – partition-active )</p>
<p>Partition active state.</p>
</section>
<section id="partition-type">
<h3><code class="docutils literal notranslate"><span class="pre">partition-type</span></code></h3>
<p>( partition – partition-type )</p>
<p>Partition type.</p>
</section>
<section id="partition-first-sector">
<h3><code class="docutils literal notranslate"><span class="pre">partition-first-sector</span></code></h3>
<p>( partition – partition-first-sector )</p>
<p>Partition first sector index.</p>
</section>
<section id="partition-sectors">
<h3><code class="docutils literal notranslate"><span class="pre">partition-sectors</span></code></h3>
<p>( partition – partition-sectors )</p>
<p>Partition sectors.</p>
</section>
<section id="id3">
<h3><code class="docutils literal notranslate"><span class="pre">partition-active?</span></code></h3>
<p>( partition – active? )</p>
<p>Is the partition active?</p>
</section>
<section id="base-fat32-fs">
<h3><code class="docutils literal notranslate"><span class="pre">&lt;base-fat32-fs&gt;</span></code></h3>
<p>( – class )</p>
<p>The base FAT32 filesystem class. This class is not to be instantiated by itself.</p>
<p>The <code class="docutils literal notranslate"><span class="pre">&lt;base-fat32-fs&gt;</span></code> class includes the following methods, which are implemented by its subclasses:</p>
</section>
<section id="root-dir">
<h3><code class="docutils literal notranslate"><span class="pre">root-dir&#64;</span></code></h3>
<p>( dir fs – )</p>
<p>Initialize a root directory of a FAT32 filesystem; the directory object need not be initialized already, but if it is no harm will result.</p>
</section>
<section id="with-root-path">
<h3><code class="docutils literal notranslate"><span class="pre">with-root-path</span></code></h3>
<p>( c-addr u xt fs ) ( xt: c-addr’ u’ dir – )</p>
<p>Parse a path starting at the root directory of a FAT32 filesystem, and pass the leaf’s name along with a directory object containing that leaf (or which would contain said leaf if it did not exist already) to the passed in <em>xt</em>. Note that said directory object will be destroyed when <em>xt</em> returns.</p>
</section>
<section id="root-path-exists">
<h3><code class="docutils literal notranslate"><span class="pre">root-path-exists?</span></code></h3>
<p>( c-addr u fs – exists? )</p>
<p>Get whether a file or directory exists at the specified path starting at the root directory of a FAT32 filesystem.</p>
</section>
<section id="flush">
<h3><code class="docutils literal notranslate"><span class="pre">flush</span></code></h3>
<p>( fs – )</p>
<p>Flush any dirty blocks cached by the underlying block device.</p>
</section>
<section id="fat32-fs">
<h3><code class="docutils literal notranslate"><span class="pre">&lt;fat32-fs&gt;</span></code></h3>
<p>( – class )</p>
<p>The FAT32 filesystem class. This class implements <code class="docutils literal notranslate"><span class="pre">&lt;base-fat32-fs&gt;</span></code>.</p>
<p>The <code class="docutils literal notranslate"><span class="pre">&lt;fat32-fs&gt;</span></code> class includes the following constructor:</p>
</section>
<section id="id4">
<h3><code class="docutils literal notranslate"><span class="pre">new</span></code></h3>
<p>( partition device fs – )</p>
<p>Construct an instance of the <code class="docutils literal notranslate"><span class="pre">&lt;fat32-fs&gt;</span></code> class with block device <em>device</em> and MBR partition entry <em>partition</em>. Note that after executing this the filesystem will be ready for use, and the block device must be in working order at this time.</p>
</section>
<section id="fat32-file">
<h3><code class="docutils literal notranslate"><span class="pre">&lt;fat32-file&gt;</span></code></h3>
<p>( –  class )</p>
<p>The FAT32 file class.</p>
<p>The <code class="docutils literal notranslate"><span class="pre">&lt;fat32-file&gt;</span></code> class includes the following constructor:</p>
</section>
<section id="id5">
<h3><code class="docutils literal notranslate"><span class="pre">new</span></code></h3>
<p>( fs file – )</p>
<p>Construct an instance of <code class="docutils literal notranslate"><span class="pre">&lt;fat32-file&gt;</span></code> with the FAT32 filesystem <em>fs</em>.</p>
<p>The <code class="docutils literal notranslate"><span class="pre">&lt;fat32-file&gt;</span></code> class includes the following methods:</p>
</section>
<section id="close-file">
<h3><code class="docutils literal notranslate"><span class="pre">close-file</span></code></h3>
<p>( file – )</p>
<p>Close a file.</p>
</section>
<section id="file-open">
<h3><code class="docutils literal notranslate"><span class="pre">file-open?</span></code></h3>
<p>( file – open? )</p>
<p>Get whether a file is open.</p>
</section>
<section id="read-file">
<h3><code class="docutils literal notranslate"><span class="pre">read-file</span></code></h3>
<p>( c-addr u file – bytes )</p>
<p>Read data from a file.</p>
</section>
<section id="write-file">
<h3><code class="docutils literal notranslate"><span class="pre">write-file</span></code></h3>
<p>( c-addr u file – bytes )</p>
<p>Write data to a file.</p>
</section>
<section id="truncate-file">
<h3><code class="docutils literal notranslate"><span class="pre">truncate-file</span></code></h3>
<p>( file – )</p>
<p>Truncate a file.</p>
</section>
<section id="seek-file">
<h3><code class="docutils literal notranslate"><span class="pre">seek-file</span></code></h3>
<p>( offset whence file – )</p>
<p>Seek in a file.</p>
</section>
<section id="tell-file">
<h3><code class="docutils literal notranslate"><span class="pre">tell-file</span></code></h3>
<p>( file – offset )</p>
<p>Get the current offset in a file.</p>
</section>
<section id="file-size">
<h3><code class="docutils literal notranslate"><span class="pre">file-size&#64;</span></code></h3>
<p>( file – bytes )</p>
<p>Get the size of a file.</p>
</section>
<section id="fat32-dir">
<h3><code class="docutils literal notranslate"><span class="pre">&lt;fat32-dir&gt;</span></code></h3>
<p>The FAT32 directory class.</p>
<p>The <code class="docutils literal notranslate"><span class="pre">&lt;fat32-dir&gt;</span></code> class includes the following constructor:</p>
</section>
<section id="id6">
<h3><code class="docutils literal notranslate"><span class="pre">new</span></code></h3>
<p>( fs file – )</p>
<p>Construct an instance of <code class="docutils literal notranslate"><span class="pre">&lt;fat32-dir&gt;</span></code> with the FAT32 filesystem <em>fs</em>.</p>
<p>The <code class="docutils literal notranslate"><span class="pre">&lt;fat32-dir&gt;</span></code> class includes the following methods:</p>
</section>
<section id="close-dir">
<h3><code class="docutils literal notranslate"><span class="pre">close-dir</span></code></h3>
<p>( dir – )</p>
<p>Close a directory.</p>
</section>
<section id="dir-open">
<h3><code class="docutils literal notranslate"><span class="pre">dir-open?</span></code></h3>
<p>( dir – open? )</p>
<p>Get whether a directory is open.</p>
</section>
<section id="with-path">
<h3><code class="docutils literal notranslate"><span class="pre">with-path</span></code></h3>
<p>( c-addr u xt dir – ) ( xt: c-addr’ u’ dir’ – )</p>
<p>Parse a path starting at a given directory, and pass the leaf’s name along with a directory object containing that leaf (or which would contain said leaf if it did not exist already) to the passed in <em>xt</em>. Note that said directory object will be destroyed when <em>xt</em> returns unless it was the original directory object passed in.</p>
</section>
<section id="path-exists">
<h3><code class="docutils literal notranslate"><span class="pre">path-exists?</span></code></h3>
<p>( c-addr u dir – exists? )</p>
<p>Get whether a file or directory exist at the specified path starting at a given directory.</p>
</section>
<section id="exists">
<h3><code class="docutils literal notranslate"><span class="pre">exists?</span></code></h3>
<p>( c-addr u dir – exists? )</p>
<p>Get whether a directory contains a file or directory of the specified name.</p>
</section>
<section id="file">
<h3><code class="docutils literal notranslate"><span class="pre">file?</span></code></h3>
<p>( c-addr u – file? )</p>
<p>Get whether the entry in a directory with the specified name is a file.</p>
</section>
<section id="dir">
<h3><code class="docutils literal notranslate"><span class="pre">dir?</span></code></h3>
<p>( c-addr u – dir? )</p>
<p>Get whether the entry in a directory with the specified name is a directory.</p>
</section>
<section id="read-dir">
<h3><code class="docutils literal notranslate"><span class="pre">read-dir</span></code></h3>
<p>( entry dir – entry-read? )</p>
<p>Read an entry from a directory, and return whether an entry was read.</p>
</section>
<section id="create-file">
<h3><code class="docutils literal notranslate"><span class="pre">create-file</span></code></h3>
<p>( c-addr u new-file dir – )</p>
<p>Create a file. Note that <em>new-file</em> need not be initialized prior to use, but no harm is done if it is.</p>
</section>
<section id="open-file">
<h3><code class="docutils literal notranslate"><span class="pre">open-file</span></code></h3>
<p>( c-addr u opened-file dir – )</p>
<p>Open a file. Note that <em>opened-file</em> need not be initialized prior to use, but no harm is done if it is.</p>
</section>
<section id="remove-file">
<h3><code class="docutils literal notranslate"><span class="pre">remove-file</span></code></h3>
<p>( c-addr u dir – )</p>
<p>Remove a file.</p>
</section>
<section id="create-dir">
<h3><code class="docutils literal notranslate"><span class="pre">create-dir</span></code></h3>
<p>( c-addr u new-dir dir – )</p>
<p>Create a directory. Note that <em>new-dir</em> need not be initialized prior to use, but no harm is done if it is.</p>
</section>
<section id="open-dir">
<h3><code class="docutils literal notranslate"><span class="pre">open-dir</span></code></h3>
<p>( c-addr u opened-dir dir – )</p>
<p>Open a directory. Note that <em>opened-dir</em> need not be initialized prior to use, but no harm is done if it is.</p>
</section>
<section id="remove-dir">
<h3><code class="docutils literal notranslate"><span class="pre">remove-dir</span></code></h3>
<p>( c-addr u dir – )</p>
<p>Remove a directory.</p>
</section>
<section id="rename">
<h3><code class="docutils literal notranslate"><span class="pre">rename</span></code></h3>
<p>( new-c-addr new-u c-addr u dir – )</p>
<p>Rename a file or directory.</p>
</section>
<section id="dir-empty">
<h3><code class="docutils literal notranslate"><span class="pre">dir-empty?</span></code></h3>
<p>( dir – empty? )</p>
<p>Get whether a directory is empty.</p>
</section>
<section id="fat32-entry">
<h3><code class="docutils literal notranslate"><span class="pre">&lt;fat32-entry&gt;</span></code></h3>
<p>( – class )</p>
<p>The FAT32 directory entry class.</p>
<p>The <code class="docutils literal notranslate"><span class="pre">&lt;fat32-entry&gt;</span></code> class has no constructor.</p>
<p>The <code class="docutils literal notranslate"><span class="pre">&lt;fat32-entry&gt;</span></code> class has the following members:</p>
</section>
<section id="short-file-name">
<h3><code class="docutils literal notranslate"><span class="pre">short-file-name</span></code></h3>
<p>( entry – short-file-name-addr )</p>
<p>This member is 8 bytes in size.</p>
<p>The short file name component, padded with spaces.</p>
<p>The first byte can have the special values:
$00: final entry in the directory entry table
$05: the initial byte is actually $35
$2E: the dot entry
$E5: the directory entry has been deleted</p>
</section>
<section id="short-file-ext">
<h3><code class="docutils literal notranslate"><span class="pre">short-file-ext</span></code></h3>
<p>( entry – short-file-ext-addr )</p>
<p>This member is 3 bytes in size.</p>
<p>The short file extension component, padded with spaces.</p>
</section>
<section id="file-attributes">
<h3><code class="docutils literal notranslate"><span class="pre">file-attributes</span></code></h3>
<p>( entry – file-attributes-addr )</p>
<p>This member is 1 bytes in size.</p>
<p>The file attributes.</p>
<p>There are the following bits:
$01: read only
$02: hidden
$04: system (do not move in the filesystem)
$08: volume label
$10: subdirectory (subdirectories have a file size of zero)
$20: archive
$40: device
$80: reserved</p>
</section>
<section id="nt-vfat-case">
<h3><code class="docutils literal notranslate"><span class="pre">nt-vfat-case</span></code></h3>
<p>( entry – nt-vfat-case-addr )</p>
<p>This member is 1 bytes in size.</p>
<p>Windows NT VFAT case information.</p>
</section>
<section id="create-time-fine">
<h3><code class="docutils literal notranslate"><span class="pre">create-time-fine</span></code></h3>
<p>( entry – create-time-fine-addr )</p>
<p>This member is 1 bytes in size.</p>
<p>Create time file resolution, 10 ms increments, from 0 to 199.</p>
</section>
<section id="create-time-coarse">
<h3><code class="docutils literal notranslate"><span class="pre">create-time-coarse</span></code></h3>
<p>( entry – create-time-coarse-addr )</p>
<p>This member is 2 bytes in size.</p>
<p>Create time with coarse resolution, 2 s increments.</p>
<p>bits 15-11: hours (0-23)
bits 10-5: minutes (0-59)
bits 4-0: seconds / 2 (0-29)</p>
</section>
<section id="create-date">
<h3><code class="docutils literal notranslate"><span class="pre">create-date</span></code></h3>
<p>( entry – create-date-addr )</p>
<p>This member is 2 bytes in size.</p>
<p>Create date.</p>
<p>bits 15-9: year (0 = 1980)
bits 8-5: month (1-12)
bits 4-0: day (1-31)</p>
</section>
<section id="access-date">
<h3><code class="docutils literal notranslate"><span class="pre">access-date</span></code></h3>
<p>( entry – access-date-addr )</p>
<p>This member is 2 bytes in size.</p>
<p>Last access date.</p>
<p>bits 15-9: year (0 = 1980)
bits 8-5: month (1-12)
bits 4-0: day (1-31)</p>
</section>
<section id="first-cluster-high">
<h3><code class="docutils literal notranslate"><span class="pre">first-cluster-high</span></code></h3>
<p>( entry – first-cluster-high-addr )</p>
<p>This member is 2 bytes in size.</p>
<p>High two bytes of the first cluster number.</p>
</section>
<section id="modify-time-coarse">
<h3><code class="docutils literal notranslate"><span class="pre">modify-time-coarse</span></code></h3>
<p>( entry – modify-time-coarse-addr )</p>
<p>This member is 2 bytes in size.</p>
<p>Last modify time with coarse resolution, 2 s increments.</p>
<p>bits 15-11: hours (0-23)
bits 10-5: minutes (0-59)
bits 4-0: seconds / 2 (0-29)</p>
</section>
<section id="modify-date">
<h3><code class="docutils literal notranslate"><span class="pre">modify-date</span></code></h3>
<p>( entry – modify-date-addr )</p>
<p>This member is 2 bytes in size.</p>
<p>Last modify date.</p>
<p>bits 15-9: year (0 = 1980)
bits 8-5: month (1-12)
bits 4-0: day (1-31)</p>
</section>
<section id="first-cluster-low">
<h3><code class="docutils literal notranslate"><span class="pre">first-cluster-low</span></code></h3>
<p>( entry – first-cluster-low-addr )</p>
<p>This member is 2 bytes in size.</p>
<p>Low two bytes of the first cluster number.</p>
</section>
<section id="entry-file-size">
<h3><code class="docutils literal notranslate"><span class="pre">entry-file-size</span></code></h3>
<p>( entry – entry-file-size-addr )</p>
<p>This member is 4 bytes in size.</p>
<p>The file size; is always 0 for subdirectories and volume labels.</p>
</section>
<section id="buffer-entry">
<h3><code class="docutils literal notranslate"><span class="pre">buffer&gt;entry</span></code></h3>
<p>( addr entry – )</p>
<p>Import a buffer into a directory entry.</p>
</section>
<section id="entry-buffer">
<h3><code class="docutils literal notranslate"><span class="pre">entry&gt;buffer</span></code></h3>
<p>( addr entry – )</p>
<p>Export a directory entry as a buffer.</p>
</section>
<section id="init-blank-entry">
<h3><code class="docutils literal notranslate"><span class="pre">init-blank-entry</span></code></h3>
<p>( entry – )</p>
<p>Initialize a blank directory entry.</p>
</section>
<section id="init-file-entry">
<h3><code class="docutils literal notranslate"><span class="pre">init-file-entry</span></code></h3>
<p>( file-size first-cluster c-addr u entry – )</p>
<p>Initialize a file directory entry.</p>
</section>
<section id="init-dir-entry">
<h3><code class="docutils literal notranslate"><span class="pre">init-dir-entry</span></code></h3>
<p>( first-cluster c-addr u entry – )</p>
<p>Initialize a subdirectory directory entry.</p>
</section>
<section id="init-end-entry">
<h3><code class="docutils literal notranslate"><span class="pre">init-end-entry</span></code></h3>
<p>( entry – )</p>
<p>Initialize an end directory entry.</p>
</section>
<section id="mark-entry-deleted">
<h3><code class="docutils literal notranslate"><span class="pre">mark-entry-deleted</span></code></h3>
<p>( entry – )</p>
<p>Mark a directory entry as deleted.</p>
</section>
<section id="entry-deleted">
<h3><code class="docutils literal notranslate"><span class="pre">entry-deleted?</span></code></h3>
<p>( entry – deleted? )</p>
<p>Get whether a directory entry has been deleted.</p>
</section>
<section id="entry-end">
<h3><code class="docutils literal notranslate"><span class="pre">entry-end?</span></code></h3>
<p>( entry – end? )</p>
<p>Get whether a directory entry is the last in a directory.</p>
</section>
<section id="entry-file">
<h3><code class="docutils literal notranslate"><span class="pre">entry-file?</span></code></h3>
<p>( entry – file? )</p>
<p>Get whether a directory entry is for a file.</p>
</section>
<section id="entry-dir">
<h3><code class="docutils literal notranslate"><span class="pre">entry-dir?</span></code></h3>
<p>( entry – subdir? )</p>
<p>Get whether a directory entry is for a subdirectory.</p>
</section>
<section id="first-cluster">
<h3><code class="docutils literal notranslate"><span class="pre">first-cluster&#64;</span></code></h3>
<p>( entry – cluster )</p>
<p>Get the first cluster index of a directory entry.</p>
</section>
<section id="id7">
<h3><code class="docutils literal notranslate"><span class="pre">first-cluster!</span></code></h3>
<p>( cluster entry – )</p>
<p>Set the first cluster index of a directory entry.</p>
</section>
<section id="file-name">
<h3><code class="docutils literal notranslate"><span class="pre">file-name!</span></code></h3>
<p>( c-addr u entry – )</p>
<p>Set the file name of a directory entry, converted from a normal string.</p>
</section>
<section id="dir-name">
<h3><code class="docutils literal notranslate"><span class="pre">dir-name!</span></code></h3>
<p>( c-addr u entry – )</p>
<p>Set the directory name of a directory entry, converted from a normal string.</p>
</section>
<section id="id8">
<h3><code class="docutils literal notranslate"><span class="pre">file-name&#64;</span></code></h3>
<p>( c-addr u entry – c-addr u’ )</p>
<p>Get the file name of a directory entry, converted to a normal string.</p>
</section>
<section id="create-date-time">
<h3><code class="docutils literal notranslate"><span class="pre">create-date-time!</span></code></h3>
<p>( date-time entry – )</p>
<p>Set the creation date/time of a directory entry, with second resolution.</p>
</section>
<section id="id9">
<h3><code class="docutils literal notranslate"><span class="pre">create-date-time&#64;</span></code></h3>
<p>( date-time entry – )</p>
<p>Get the creation date/time of a directory entry, with second resolution and day-of-the-week calculation.</p>
</section>
<section id="modify-date-time">
<h3><code class="docutils literal notranslate"><span class="pre">modify-date-time!</span></code></h3>
<p>( date-time entry – )</p>
<p>Set the modification date/time of a directory entry, with two second resolution.</p>
</section>
<section id="id10">
<h3><code class="docutils literal notranslate"><span class="pre">modify-date-time&#64;</span></code></h3>
<p>( date-time entry – )</p>
<p>Get the modification date/time of a directory entry, with two second resolution and day-of-the-week calculation.</p>
</section>
</section>
</section>


            <div class="clearer"></div>
          </div>
      </div>
      <div class="clearer"></div>
    </div>
  </body>
</html>