<!DOCTYPE html>

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
  <head>
    <meta charset="utf-8" />
    <meta name="viewport" content="width=device-width, initial-scale=1.0" /><meta name="viewport" content="width=device-width, initial-scale=1" />

    <title>I2C Words</title>
    <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../_static/pygments.css" />
    <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../_static/epub.css" /> 
  </head><body>

    <div class="document">
      <div class="documentwrapper">
          <div class="body" role="main">
            
  <section id="i2c-words">
<h1>I2C Words</h1>
<p>zeptoforth includes support for I2C peripherals on the RP2040 (e.g. the Raspberry Pi Pico) and the RP2350 (e.g.. the Raspberry Pi Pico 2). It supports both master and slave modes of operation on two different I2C peripheral devices, numbered 0 and 1. It supports clocks up to 1 MHz, as that is the limit supported by the RP2040’s I2C peripherals, and defaults to a clock of 400 kHz. Note that it does not currently support general calls or slaves sending NACK, and handling of interrupted sends when multiple masters are in use must be handled manually by the user.</p>
<section id="i2c">
<h2><code class="docutils literal notranslate"><span class="pre">i2c</span></code></h2>
<p>The <code class="docutils literal notranslate"><span class="pre">i2c</span></code> module contains the following words:</p>
<section id="enable-i2c">
<h3><code class="docutils literal notranslate"><span class="pre">enable-i2c</span></code></h3>
<p>( i2c – )</p>
<p>Enable an I2C peripheral. Note that multiple nested enablings are permitted.</p>
</section>
<section id="disable-i2c">
<h3><code class="docutils literal notranslate"><span class="pre">disable-i2c</span></code></h3>
<p>( i2c – )</p>
<p>Disable an I2C peripheral. Note that multiple nested disablings are permitted.</p>
</section>
<section id="i2c-clock">
<h3><code class="docutils literal notranslate"><span class="pre">i2c-clock!</span></code></h3>
<p>( clock i2c – )</p>
<p>Set the clock for an I2C peripheral. Note that for most purposes a clock of 400000 is recommended, and it is this value to which the clock of an I2C peripheral defaults.</p>
</section>
<section id="i2c-alternate">
<h3><code class="docutils literal notranslate"><span class="pre">i2c-alternate</span></code></h3>
<p>( i2c – alternate )</p>
<p>Get the alternate function for an I2C peripheral.</p>
</section>
<section id="i2c-pin">
<h3><code class="docutils literal notranslate"><span class="pre">i2c-pin</span></code></h3>
<p>( i2c pin – )</p>
<p>Configure a pin to be an I2C pin. In releases more recent than 1.14.1 this will set the pin to be an internal pull-up per the RP2040 and RP2350 datasheets/reference manuals. Previously it did not change the pull-up/pull-down configuration of the pin.</p>
</section>
<section id="master-i2c">
<h3><code class="docutils literal notranslate"><span class="pre">master-i2c</span></code></h3>
<p>( i2c – )</p>
<p>Set an I2C peripheral to be a master.</p>
</section>
<section id="slave-i2c">
<h3><code class="docutils literal notranslate"><span class="pre">slave-i2c</span></code></h3>
<p>( i2c – )</p>
<p>Set an I2C peripheral to be a slave.</p>
</section>
<section id="bit-i2c-addr">
<h3><code class="docutils literal notranslate"><span class="pre">7-bit-i2c-addr</span></code></h3>
<p>( i2c – )</p>
<p>Set an I2C peripheral to use 7-bit I2C addresses.</p>
</section>
<section id="id1">
<h3><code class="docutils literal notranslate"><span class="pre">10-bit-i2c-addr</span></code></h3>
<p>( i2c – )</p>
<p>Set an I2C peripheral to use 10-bit I2C addresses.</p>
</section>
<section id="i2c-target-addr">
<h3><code class="docutils literal notranslate"><span class="pre">i2c-target-addr!</span></code></h3>
<p>( i2c-addr i2c – )</p>
<p>Set the target address of an I2C peripheral.</p>
</section>
<section id="i2c-slave-addr">
<h3><code class="docutils literal notranslate"><span class="pre">i2c-slave-addr!</span></code></h3>
<p>( i2c-addr i2c – )</p>
<p>Set the address of a slave I2C peripheral.</p>
</section>
<section id="wait-i2c-master">
<h3><code class="docutils literal notranslate"><span class="pre">wait-i2c-master</span></code></h3>
<p>( i2c – accepted )</p>
<p>Wait on a slave I2C peripheral for communication from an I2C master, and return either <code class="docutils literal notranslate"><span class="pre">accept-send</span></code> if the I2C master initiates sending data or <code class="docutils literal notranslate"><span class="pre">accept-recv</span></code> if the I2C master initiates receiving data. If <code class="docutils literal notranslate"><span class="pre">timeout</span></code> (in the <code class="docutils literal notranslate"><span class="pre">task</span></code> module) is set to a value other than <code class="docutils literal notranslate"><span class="pre">no-timeout</span></code> a timeout in ticks (usually 100 µs per tick) is waited for, where if no communication is initiated before the timeout expires, <code class="docutils literal notranslate"><span class="pre">x-timed-out</span></code> is raised.</p>
</section>
<section id="wait-i2c-master-send">
<h3><code class="docutils literal notranslate"><span class="pre">wait-i2c-master-send</span></code></h3>
<p>( i2c – )</p>
<p>Wait on a slave I2C peripheral for the initiation of sending data from an I2C master. If <code class="docutils literal notranslate"><span class="pre">timeout</span></code> (in the <code class="docutils literal notranslate"><span class="pre">task</span></code> module) is set to a value other than <code class="docutils literal notranslate"><span class="pre">no-timeout</span></code> a timeout in ticks (usually 100 µs per tick) is waited for, where if no send is initiated before the timeout expires, <code class="docutils literal notranslate"><span class="pre">x-timed-out</span></code> is raised.</p>
</section>
<section id="wait-i2c-master-recv">
<h3><code class="docutils literal notranslate"><span class="pre">wait-i2c-master-recv</span></code></h3>
<p>( i2c – )</p>
<p>Wait on a slave I2C peripheral for the initiation of receiving data from an I2C master. If <code class="docutils literal notranslate"><span class="pre">timeout</span></code> (in the <code class="docutils literal notranslate"><span class="pre">task</span></code> module) is set to a value other than <code class="docutils literal notranslate"><span class="pre">no-timeout</span></code> a timeout in ticks (usually 100 µs per tick) is waited for, where if no receive is initiated before the timeout expires, <code class="docutils literal notranslate"><span class="pre">x-timed-out</span></code> is raised.</p>
</section>
<section id="id2">
<h3><code class="docutils literal notranslate"><span class="pre">&gt;i2c</span></code></h3>
<p>( c-addr u i2c – u’ )</p>
<p>Send data from a buffer defined by <em>c-addr</em> and <em>u</em> bytes over an I2C peripheral. The number of bytes actually sent are returned. If <code class="docutils literal notranslate"><span class="pre">timeout</span></code> (in the <code class="docutils literal notranslate"><span class="pre">task</span></code> module) is set to a value other than <code class="docutils literal notranslate"><span class="pre">no-timeout</span></code> a timeout in ticks (usually 100 µs per tick) is waited for, where if sending is not complete before the timeout expires, <code class="docutils literal notranslate"><span class="pre">x-timed-out</span></code> is raised.</p>
</section>
<section id="i2c-stop">
<h3><code class="docutils literal notranslate"><span class="pre">&gt;i2c-stop</span></code></h3>
<p>( c-addr u i2c – u’ )</p>
<p>Send data from a buffer defined by <em>c-addr</em> and <em>u</em> bytes over an I2C peripheral and signal a STOP condition once sending is complete. The number of bytes actually sent are returned. If <code class="docutils literal notranslate"><span class="pre">timeout</span></code> (in the <code class="docutils literal notranslate"><span class="pre">task</span></code> module) is set to a value other than <code class="docutils literal notranslate"><span class="pre">no-timeout</span></code> a timeout in ticks (usually 100 µs per tick) is waited for, where if sending is not complete before the timeout expires, <code class="docutils literal notranslate"><span class="pre">x-timed-out</span></code> is raised.</p>
</section>
<section id="i2c-restart">
<h3><code class="docutils literal notranslate"><span class="pre">&gt;i2c-restart</span></code></h3>
<p>( c-addr u i2c – u’ )</p>
<p>Send data from a buffer defined by <em>c-addr</em> and <em>u</em> bytes over an I2C peripheral and signal a RESTART condition at the beginning of sending. The number of bytes actually sent are returned. If <code class="docutils literal notranslate"><span class="pre">timeout</span></code> (in the <code class="docutils literal notranslate"><span class="pre">task</span></code> module) is set to a value other than <code class="docutils literal notranslate"><span class="pre">no-timeout</span></code> a timeout in ticks (usually 100 µs per tick) is waited for, where if sending is not complete before the timeout expires, <code class="docutils literal notranslate"><span class="pre">x-timed-out</span></code> is raised.</p>
</section>
<section id="i2c-restart-stop">
<h3><code class="docutils literal notranslate"><span class="pre">&gt;i2c-restart-stop</span></code></h3>
<p>( c-addr u i2c – u’ )</p>
<p>Send data from a buffer defined by <em>c-addr</em> and <em>u</em> bytes over an I2C peripheral, signaling a RESTART condition at the beginning of sending, and signal a STOP condition once sending is complete.The number of bytes actually sent are returned.  If <code class="docutils literal notranslate"><span class="pre">timeout</span></code> (in the <code class="docutils literal notranslate"><span class="pre">task</span></code> module) is set to a value other than <code class="docutils literal notranslate"><span class="pre">no-timeout</span></code> a timeout in ticks (usually 100 µs per tick) is waited for, where if sending is not complete before the timeout expires, <code class="docutils literal notranslate"><span class="pre">x-timed-out</span></code> is raised.</p>
</section>
<section id="id3">
<h3><code class="docutils literal notranslate"><span class="pre">i2c&gt;</span></code></h3>
<p>( c-addr u i2c – u’ )</p>
<p>Receive data into a buffer defined by <em>c-addr</em> and <em>u</em> bytes from an I2C peripheral. The number of bytes actually received are returned. If <code class="docutils literal notranslate"><span class="pre">timeout</span></code> (in the <code class="docutils literal notranslate"><span class="pre">task</span></code> module) is set to a value other than <code class="docutils literal notranslate"><span class="pre">no-timeout</span></code> a timeout in ticks (usually 100 µs per tick) is waited for, where if receiving is not complete before the timeout expires, <code class="docutils literal notranslate"><span class="pre">x-timed-out</span></code> is raised.</p>
</section>
<section id="id4">
<h3><code class="docutils literal notranslate"><span class="pre">i2c-stop&gt;</span></code></h3>
<p>( c-addr u i2c – u’ )</p>
<p>Receive data into a buffer defined by <em>c-addr</em> and <em>u</em> bytes from an I2C peripheral and signal a STOP condition once receiving is complete. The number of bytes actually received are returned. If <code class="docutils literal notranslate"><span class="pre">timeout</span></code> (in the <code class="docutils literal notranslate"><span class="pre">task</span></code> module) is set to a value other than <code class="docutils literal notranslate"><span class="pre">no-timeout</span></code> a timeout in ticks (usually 100 µs per tick) is waited for, where if receiving is not complete before the timeout expires, <code class="docutils literal notranslate"><span class="pre">x-timed-out</span></code> is raised.</p>
</section>
<section id="id5">
<h3><code class="docutils literal notranslate"><span class="pre">i2c-restart&gt;</span></code></h3>
<p>( c-addr u i2c – u’ )</p>
<p>Receive data into a buffer defined by <em>c-addr</em> and <em>u</em> bytes from an I2C peripheral and signal a RESTART condition at the beginning of receiving. The number of bytes actually received are returned. If <code class="docutils literal notranslate"><span class="pre">timeout</span></code> (in the <code class="docutils literal notranslate"><span class="pre">task</span></code> module) is set to a value other than <code class="docutils literal notranslate"><span class="pre">no-timeout</span></code> a timeout in ticks (usually 100 µs per tick) is waited for, where if receiving is not complete before the timeout expires, <code class="docutils literal notranslate"><span class="pre">x-timed-out</span></code> is raised.</p>
</section>
<section id="id6">
<h3><code class="docutils literal notranslate"><span class="pre">i2c-restart-stop&gt;</span></code></h3>
<p>( c-addr u i2c – u’ )</p>
<p>Receive data into a buffer defined by <em>c-addr</em> and <em>u</em> bytes from an I2C peripheral, signaling a RESTART condition at the beginning of receiving, and signal a STOP condition once receiving is complete. The number of bytes actually received are returned. If <code class="docutils literal notranslate"><span class="pre">timeout</span></code> (in the <code class="docutils literal notranslate"><span class="pre">task</span></code> module) is set to a value other than <code class="docutils literal notranslate"><span class="pre">no-timeout</span></code> a timeout in ticks (usually 100 µs per tick) is waited for, where if receiving is not complete before the timeout expires, <code class="docutils literal notranslate"><span class="pre">x-timed-out</span></code> is raised.</p>
</section>
<section id="i2c-nack">
<h3><code class="docutils literal notranslate"><span class="pre">i2c-nack</span></code></h3>
<p>( i2c – )</p>
<p>Set the next byte received by a slave I2C peripheral to be responded to with a NACK.</p>
</section>
<section id="clear-i2c">
<h3><code class="docutils literal notranslate"><span class="pre">clear-i2c</span></code></h3>
<p>( i2c – )</p>
<p>Reset the state of an I2C peripheral.</p>
</section>
<section id="accept-send">
<h3><code class="docutils literal notranslate"><span class="pre">accept-send</span></code></h3>
<p>( – constant )</p>
<p>Constant returned by <code class="docutils literal notranslate"><span class="pre">wait-i2c-master</span></code> on accepting a send from an I2C master.</p>
</section>
<section id="accept-recv">
<h3><code class="docutils literal notranslate"><span class="pre">accept-recv</span></code></h3>
<p>( – constant )</p>
<p>Constant returned by <code class="docutils literal notranslate"><span class="pre">wait-i2c-master</span></code> on accepting a receive from an I2C master.</p>
</section>
<section id="x-out-of-range-clock">
<h3><code class="docutils literal notranslate"><span class="pre">x-out-of-range-clock</span></code></h3>
<p>( – )</p>
<p>Exception raised if an out of range clock is set with <code class="docutils literal notranslate"><span class="pre">i2c-clock!</span></code>.</p>
</section>
<section id="x-i2c-target-noack">
<h3><code class="docutils literal notranslate"><span class="pre">x-i2c-target-noack</span></code></h3>
<p>( – )</p>
<p>Exception raised if an I2C target address is not acknowledged.</p>
</section>
<section id="x-arb-lost">
<h3><code class="docutils literal notranslate"><span class="pre">x-arb-lost</span></code></h3>
<p>( – )</p>
<p>Exception raised on arbitration lost.</p>
</section>
<section id="x-i2c-tx-error">
<h3><code class="docutils literal notranslate"><span class="pre">x-i2c-tx-error</span></code></h3>
<p>( – )</p>
<p>Exception raised on transmission error during sending.</p>
</section>
<section id="x-i2c-rx-over">
<h3><code class="docutils literal notranslate"><span class="pre">x-i2c-rx-over</span></code></h3>
<p>( – )</p>
<p>Exception raised on receive overflow; note that this should never happen, as this I2C driver configures the I2C peripherals to use clock stretching in case of RX FIFO full state.</p>
</section>
<section id="x-invalid-i2c">
<h3><code class="docutils literal notranslate"><span class="pre">x-invalid-i2c</span></code></h3>
<p>( – )</p>
<p>Exception raised on specifying an invalid I2C peripheral index (i.e. one other than 0 or 1).</p>
</section>
<section id="x-out-of-range-addr">
<h3><code class="docutils literal notranslate"><span class="pre">x-out-of-range-addr</span></code></h3>
<p>( – )</p>
<p>Exception raised on specifying an invalid I2C address.</p>
</section>
<section id="x-invalid-op-for-master-mode">
<h3><code class="docutils literal notranslate"><span class="pre">x-invalid-op-for-master-mode</span></code></h3>
<p>( – )</p>
<p>Exception raised on a slave attempting to carry out an operation which is inappropriate for the state the master is in.</p>
</section>
<section id="x-invalid-op-for-slave">
<h3><code class="docutils literal notranslate"><span class="pre">x-invalid-op-for-slave</span></code></h3>
<p>( – )</p>
<p>Exception raised on a slave attempting to carry out an operation not permitted for slaves.</p>
</section>
<section id="x-invalid-op-for-master">
<h3><code class="docutils literal notranslate"><span class="pre">x-invalid-op-for-master</span></code></h3>
<p>( – )</p>
<p>Exception raised on a master attempting to carry out an operation not permitted for masters.</p>
</section>
<section id="x-master-not-ready">
<h3><code class="docutils literal notranslate"><span class="pre">x-master-not-ready</span></code></h3>
<p>( – )</p>
<p>Exception for if a send or receive is attempted by a slave and the master is not in an appropriate state.</p>
</section>
</section>
</section>


            <div class="clearer"></div>
          </div>
      </div>
      <div class="clearer"></div>
    </div>
  </body>
</html>