<!DOCTYPE html>

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
  <head>
    <meta charset="utf-8" />
    <meta name="viewport" content="width=device-width, initial-scale=1.0" /><meta name="generator" content="Docutils 0.19: https://docutils.sourceforge.io/" />

    <title>SPI Words</title>
    <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../_static/pygments.css" />
    <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../_static/epub.css" /> 
  </head><body>

    <div class="document">
      <div class="documentwrapper">
          <div class="body" role="main">
            
  <section id="spi-words">
<h1>SPI Words</h1>
<p>There are a number of words for controlling SPI peripherals available on each of the supported microcontrollers. These are as follows:</p>
<p>Note that <em>spi</em> values as mentioned below vary between the different supported platforms. The following applies:</p>
<ul class="simple">
<li><p>On the RP2040 and RP2350 the available <em>spi</em> values are 0 and 1.</p></li>
<li><p>On the STM32F411 the available <em>spi</em> values are 1 through 5.</p></li>
<li><p>On the STM32F407 the available <em>spi</em> values are 1 through 3.</p></li>
<li><p>On the STM32L476 the available <em>spi</em> values are 1 through 3.</p></li>
<li><p>On the STM32F746 the available <em>spi</em> values are 1 through 6.</p></li>
</ul>
<section id="spi">
<h2><code class="docutils literal notranslate"><span class="pre">spi</span></code></h2>
<p>These words are in the <code class="docutils literal notranslate"><span class="pre">spi</span></code> module:</p>
<section id="all-platforms">
<h3>All platforms</h3>
<section id="enable-spi">
<h4><code class="docutils literal notranslate"><span class="pre">enable-spi</span></code></h4>
<p>( spi – )</p>
<p>Enable an SPI peripheral.</p>
</section>
<section id="disable-spi">
<h4><code class="docutils literal notranslate"><span class="pre">disable-spi</span></code></h4>
<p>( spi – )</p>
<p>Disable an SPI peripheral. Note that SPI peripherals are disabled by default.</p>
</section>
<section id="enable-spi-tx">
<h4><code class="docutils literal notranslate"><span class="pre">enable-spi-tx</span></code></h4>
<p>( spi – )</p>
<p>Enable SPI peripheral transmit.</p>
</section>
<section id="disable-spi-tx">
<h4><code class="docutils literal notranslate"><span class="pre">disable-spi-tx</span></code></h4>
<p>( spi – )</p>
<p>Disable SPI peripheral transmit.</p>
</section>
<section id="master-spi">
<h4><code class="docutils literal notranslate"><span class="pre">master-spi</span></code></h4>
<p>( spi – )</p>
<p>Set an SPI peripheral to be a master. This must be done with the SPI peripheral disabled.</p>
</section>
<section id="slave-spi">
<h4><code class="docutils literal notranslate"><span class="pre">slave-spi</span></code></h4>
<p>( spi – )</p>
<p>Set an SPI peripheral to be a slave. This must be done with the SPI peripheral disabled.</p>
</section>
<section id="spi-baud">
<h4><code class="docutils literal notranslate"><span class="pre">spi-baud!</span></code></h4>
<p>( baud spi – )</p>
<p>Set the baud of a master SPI peripheral. This must be done with the SPI peripheral disabled.</p>
</section>
<section id="motorola-spi">
<h4><code class="docutils literal notranslate"><span class="pre">motorola-spi</span></code></h4>
<p>( sph spo spi – )</p>
<p>Set the protocol of an SPI peripheral to Motorola SPI, with SPO/CPOL set to <em>spo</em> and SPH/CPHA set to <em>sph</em>. This must be done with the SPI peripheral disabled.</p>
</section>
<section id="ti-ss-spi">
<h4><code class="docutils literal notranslate"><span class="pre">ti-ss-spi</span></code></h4>
<p>( spi – )</p>
<p>Set the protocol of an SPI peripheral to TI synchronous serial. This must be done with the SPI peripheral disabled.</p>
</section>
<section id="spi-data-size">
<h4><code class="docutils literal notranslate"><span class="pre">spi-data-size!</span></code></h4>
<p>( data-size spi – )</p>
<p>Set the word size of an SPI peripheral to <em>data-size</em> bits; on the RP2040 and RP2350, STM32L476, and STM32F746 any value from 4 to 16 is permitted, whereas on the STM32F407 and STM32F411 only 8 and 16 are permitted. This must be done with the SPI peripheral disabled.</p>
</section>
<section id="id1">
<h4><code class="docutils literal notranslate"><span class="pre">&gt;spi</span></code></h4>
<p>( c spi – )</p>
<p>Emit a word to an SPI peripheral.</p>
</section>
<section id="id2">
<h4><code class="docutils literal notranslate"><span class="pre">spi&gt;</span></code></h4>
<p>( spi – c )</p>
<p>Read a word from an SPI peripheral.</p>
</section>
<section id="buffer-spi">
<h4><code class="docutils literal notranslate"><span class="pre">buffer&gt;spi</span></code></h4>
<p>( addr bytes spi – )</p>
<p>Write a buffer of data to an SPI peripheral as a master, discarding the data returned by the slave.</p>
</section>
<section id="spi-buffer">
<h4><code class="docutils literal notranslate"><span class="pre">spi&gt;buffer</span></code></h4>
<p>( add bytes filler spi – )</p>
<p>Read a buffer of data from an SPI peripheral as a master, transmitting a filler for each unit of data sent to the slave.</p>
</section>
<section id="id3">
<h4><code class="docutils literal notranslate"><span class="pre">&gt;spi?</span></code></h4>
<p>( spi – flag )</p>
<p>Get whether an SPI peripheral is ready to emit a word.</p>
</section>
<section id="id4">
<h4><code class="docutils literal notranslate"><span class="pre">spi&gt;?</span></code></h4>
<p>( spi – flag )</p>
<p>Get whether a word is ready to be read from an SPI peripheral.</p>
</section>
<section id="drain-spi">
<h4><code class="docutils literal notranslate"><span class="pre">drain-spi</span></code></h4>
<p>( spi – )</p>
<p>Empty an SPI peripheral’s receive buffer.</p>
</section>
<section id="flush-spi">
<h4><code class="docutils literal notranslate"><span class="pre">flush-spi</span></code></h4>
<p>( spi – )</p>
<p>Flush an SPI peripheral’s transmit buffer.</p>
</section>
<section id="spi-alternate">
<h4><code class="docutils literal notranslate"><span class="pre">spi-alternate</span></code></h4>
<p>( spi – )</p>
<p>The alternate function for a given SPI peripheral. Note that using <code class="docutils literal notranslate"><span class="pre">spi-pin</span></code> is recommended as some SPI peripherals may have multiple alternate functions in practice depending on the particular pin.</p>
</section>
<section id="spi-pin">
<h4><code class="docutils literal notranslate"><span class="pre">spi-pin</span></code></h4>
<p>( spi pin – )</p>
<p>Set the alternate function for <em>pin</em> to configure it for <em>spi</em>.</p>
</section>
<section id="spi-rx-handler">
<h4><code class="docutils literal notranslate"><span class="pre">spi-rx-handler!</span></code></h4>
<p>( xt spi – )</p>
<p>Set an SPI RX handler called when the SPI interrupt is called for RX data. Note that this may not be called if <code class="docutils literal notranslate"><span class="pre">spi&gt;</span></code> is called before the SPI interrupt has the chance to be invoked. A value of 0 indicates no handler.</p>
</section>
<section id="x-invalid-spi">
<h4><code class="docutils literal notranslate"><span class="pre">x-invalid-spi</span></code></h4>
<p>( – )</p>
<p>Invalid SPI peripheral exception.</p>
</section>
<section id="x-invalid-spi-clock">
<h4><code class="docutils literal notranslate"><span class="pre">x-invalid-spi-clock</span></code></h4>
<p>( – )</p>
<p>Invalid SPI clock setting exception.</p>
</section>
<section id="x-invalid-spi-data-size">
<h4><code class="docutils literal notranslate"><span class="pre">x-invalid-spi-data-size</span></code></h4>
<p>( – )</p>
<p>Invalid SPI data size setting exception.</p>
</section>
</section>
<section id="rp2040-and-rp2350-only">
<h3>RP2040 and RP2350 only</h3>
<section id="enable-spi-loopback">
<h4><code class="docutils literal notranslate"><span class="pre">enable-spi-loopback</span></code></h4>
<p>( spi – )</p>
<p>Enable SPI loopback mode for an SPI peripheral.</p>
</section>
<section id="disable-spi-loopback">
<h4><code class="docutils literal notranslate"><span class="pre">disable-spi-loopback</span></code></h4>
<p>( spi – )</p>
<p>Disable SPI loopback mdoe for an SPI peripheral.</p>
</section>
<section id="natl-microwire-spi">
<h4><code class="docutils literal notranslate"><span class="pre">natl-microwire-spi</span></code></h4>
<p>( spi – )</p>
<p>Set the protocol of the SPI peripheral to National Semiconductor Microwire.</p>
</section>
</section>
<section id="stm32f407-stm32f411-stm32l476-and-stm32f746-only">
<h3>STM32F407, STM32F411, STM32L476, and STM32F746 only</h3>
<section id="msb-first-spi">
<h4><code class="docutils literal notranslate"><span class="pre">msb-first-spi</span></code></h4>
<p>( spi – )</p>
<p>Set an SPI peripheral to have MSB-first data. This must be done with the SPI peripheral disabled.</p>
</section>
<section id="lsb-first-spi">
<h4><code class="docutils literal notranslate"><span class="pre">lsb-first-spi</span></code></h4>
<p>( spi – )</p>
<p>Set an SPI peripheral to have LSB-first data. This must be done with the SPI peripheral disabled.</p>
</section>
<section id="enable-spi-ssm">
<h4><code class="docutils literal notranslate"><span class="pre">enable-spi-ssm</span></code></h4>
<p>( spi – )</p>
<p>Enable SPI software slave management by master SPI peripherals. This must be done with the SPI peripheral disabled.</p>
</section>
<section id="disable-spi-ssm">
<h4><code class="docutils literal notranslate"><span class="pre">disable-spi-ssm</span></code></h4>
<p>( spi – )</p>
<p>Disable SPI software slave management by master SPI peripherals. This must be done with the SPI peripheral disabled.</p>
</section>
<section id="spi-ssm">
<h4><code class="docutils literal notranslate"><span class="pre">spi-ssm!</span></code></h4>
<p>( ssi spi – )</p>
<p>Set the software slave management selection for master SPI peripherals.</p>
</section>
<section id="line-spi">
<h4><code class="docutils literal notranslate"><span class="pre">1-line-spi</span></code></h4>
<p>( spi – )</p>
<p>Set an SPI peripheral to one-wire mode.</p>
</section>
<section id="id5">
<h4><code class="docutils literal notranslate"><span class="pre">2-line-spi</span></code></h4>
<p>( spi – )</p>
<p>Set an SPI peripheral to two-wire mode (the default).</p>
</section>
<section id="line-spi-in">
<h4><code class="docutils literal notranslate"><span class="pre">1-line-spi-in</span></code></h4>
<p>( spi – )</p>
<p>Set the single wire in one-wire mode to be an input.</p>
</section>
<section id="line-spi-out">
<h4><code class="docutils literal notranslate"><span class="pre">1-line-spi-out</span></code></h4>
<p>( spi – )</p>
<p>Set the single wire in one-wire mode to be an output.</p>
</section>
</section>
</section>
<section id="rp2040-only-words">
<h2>RP2040-only words</h2>
<section id="buffer-spi-raw-dma">
<h3><code class="docutils literal notranslate"><span class="pre">buffer&gt;spi-raw-dma</span></code></h3>
<p>( addr bytes dma1 dma0 spi – last-data )</p>
<p>Write a buffer of data to an SPI peripheral as a master, discarding the data returned by the slave. This word uses the DMA channels <em>dma0</em> and <em>dma1</em>, and returns the last data read from the SPI peripheral.</p>
</section>
<section id="spi-buffer-raw-dma">
<h3><code class="docutils literal notranslate"><span class="pre">spi&gt;buffer-raw-dma</span></code></h3>
<p>( add bytes filler dma1 dma0 spi – )</p>
<p>Read a buffer of data from an SPI peripheral as a master, transmitting a filler for unit of data sent to the slave. This word uses the DMA channels <em>dma0</em> and <em>dma1</em>.</p>
</section>
</section>
</section>


            <div class="clearer"></div>
          </div>
      </div>
      <div class="clearer"></div>
    </div>
  </body>
</html>