<!DOCTYPE html>

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
  <head>
    <meta charset="utf-8" />
    <meta name="viewport" content="width=device-width, initial-scale=1.0" /><meta name="generator" content="Docutils 0.19: https://docutils.sourceforge.io/" />

    <title>Watchdog</title>
    <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../_static/pygments.css" />
    <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../_static/epub.css" /> 
  </head><body>

    <div class="document">
      <div class="documentwrapper">
          <div class="body" role="main">
            
  <section id="watchdog">
<h1>Watchdog</h1>
<p>The RP2040 includes watchdog functionality that, when enabled, triggers a reboot after a set delay during which the watchdog timer is not updated. It also has the capability to force a reset. By default the watchdog timer is disabled, the watchog delay is 1 second, and the watchdog (once enabled) is updated automatically each time the multitasker runs outside of a critical section. This behavior chan be changed in that the watchdog delay can be set to any time between 0 seconds (i.e. trigger immediately, and report a ‘force’ reboot reason rather than a ‘timer’ reason) and 16.777 seconds, and the multitasker can be set to not automatically update the watchdog timer (and this require manual updating by the user).</p>
<section id="id1">
<h2><code class="docutils literal notranslate"><span class="pre">watchdog</span></code></h2>
<section id="x-out-of-range-watchdog-delay">
<h3><code class="docutils literal notranslate"><span class="pre">x-out-of-range-watchdog-delay</span></code></h3>
<p>( – )</p>
<p>Out of range watchdog delay exception.</p>
</section>
<section id="update-watchdog">
<h3><code class="docutils literal notranslate"><span class="pre">update-watchdog</span></code></h3>
<p>( – )</p>
<p>Update the watchdog timer with the currently set watchdog delay.</p>
</section>
<section id="force-watchdog-reboot">
<h3><code class="docutils literal notranslate"><span class="pre">force-watchdog-reboot</span></code></h3>
<p>( – )</p>
<p>Force an immediate watchdog reboot even if the watchdog timer is not enabled.</p>
</section>
<section id="watchdog-delay-us">
<h3><code class="docutils literal notranslate"><span class="pre">watchdog-delay-us!</span></code></h3>
<p>( us – )</p>
<p>Set the watchdog delay to a specified positve number of microseconds, up to a delay of 8388607 microseconds. If an out of range delay is provided <code class="docutils literal notranslate"><span class="pre">x-out-of-range-watchdog-delay</span></code> will be raised. Note that if a value of 0 is provided and the watchdog is currently enabled the watchdog will trigger immediately and a ‘force’ reboot reason will be reported; this also will happen if the watchdog is disabled, and then the watchdog is enabled after this is called. Also note that if the watchdog is enabled and a value other than 0 is given the watchog timer will be updated with that value.</p>
</section>
<section id="enable-watchdog">
<h3><code class="docutils literal notranslate"><span class="pre">enable-watchdog</span></code></h3>
<p>( – )</p>
<p>Enable the watchdog timer. If the watchdog delay is currently set to 0 the watchdog will trigger immediately and a ‘force’ reboot reason will be reported.</p>
</section>
<section id="disable-watchdog">
<h3><code class="docutils literal notranslate"><span class="pre">disable-watchdog</span></code></h3>
<p>( – )</p>
<p>Disable the watchdog timer.</p>
</section>
<section id="reboot-reason-watchdog-force">
<h3><code class="docutils literal notranslate"><span class="pre">reboot-reason-watchdog-force?</span></code></h3>
<p>( – force? )</p>
<p>Get whether the most recent reboot was due to a watchdog force.</p>
</section>
<section id="reboot-reason-watchdog-timer">
<h3><code class="docutils literal notranslate"><span class="pre">reboot-reason-watchdog-timer?</span></code></h3>
<p>( – timer? )</p>
<p>Get whether the most reason reboot was due to a watchdog timeout.</p>
</section>
<section id="enable-multitasker-update-watchdog">
<h3><code class="docutils literal notranslate"><span class="pre">enable-multitasker-update-watchdog</span></code></h3>
<p>( – )</p>
<p>Enable the multitasker automatically updating the watchdog timer each time it runs outside of a critical section.</p>
</section>
<section id="disable-multitasker-update-watchdog">
<h3><code class="docutils literal notranslate"><span class="pre">disable-multitasker-update-watchdog</span></code></h3>
<p>( – )</p>
<p>Disable the multitasker automatically updating the watchdog timer each time it runs outside of a critical section.</p>
</section>
<section id="enable-fault-watchdog-reboot">
<h3><code class="docutils literal notranslate"><span class="pre">enable-fault-watchdog-reboot</span></code></h3>
<p>( – )</p>
<p>Enable triggering a watchdog force reboot on a hardware fault.</p>
</section>
<section id="disable-fault-watchdog-reboot">
<h3><code class="docutils literal notranslate"><span class="pre">disable-fault-watchdog-reboot</span></code></h3>
<p>( – )</p>
<p>Disable triggering a watchdog force reboot on a hardware fault.</p>
</section>
</section>
</section>


            <div class="clearer"></div>
          </div>
      </div>
      <div class="clearer"></div>
    </div>
  </body>
</html>