<!DOCTYPE html>

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
  <head>
    <meta charset="utf-8" />
    <meta name="viewport" content="width=device-width, initial-scale=1.0" /><meta name="viewport" content="width=device-width, initial-scale=1" />

    <title>Bitmap Utilities</title>
    <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../_static/pygments.css" />
    <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../_static/epub.css" /> 
  </head><body>

    <div class="document">
      <div class="documentwrapper">
          <div class="body" role="main">
            
  <section id="bitmap-utilities">
<h1>Bitmap Utilities</h1>
<p>Under <code class="docutils literal notranslate"><span class="pre">extra/common/bitmap_utils.fs</span></code> there is optional code for supporting additional bitmap operations, particularly line and circle-drawing.</p>
<p>Under <code class="docutils literal notranslate"><span class="pre">extra/common/bitmap_lit.fs</span></code> there is optional code for defining bitmap literals. Bitmap literals specify static blocks of pixels which are used as buffers for instances of <code class="docutils literal notranslate"><span class="pre">bitmap::&lt;bitmap-no-clear&gt;</span></code> with the same width and height. Note that they are constrained by the maximum line length of 255 bytes that zeptoforth supports.</p>
<section id="bitmap-utils">
<h2><code class="docutils literal notranslate"><span class="pre">bitmap-utils</span></code></h2>
<p>The <code class="docutils literal notranslate"><span class="pre">bitmap-utils</span></code> module contains the following words:</p>
<section id="draw-pixel-line">
<h3><code class="docutils literal notranslate"><span class="pre">draw-pixel-line</span></code></h3>
<p>( constant x0 y0 x1 y1 op dst-bitmap – )</p>
<p>This draws a pixel line with drawing operation <em>op</em> on <em>dst-bitmap</em> from (<em>x0</em>, *y0) to (<em>x1</em>, <em>y1</em>) using the <em>constant</em> value as used by <code class="docutils literal notranslate"><span class="pre">bitmap::draw-pixel-const</span></code>.</p>
</section>
<section id="draw-rect-line">
<h3><code class="docutils literal notranslate"><span class="pre">draw-rect-line</span></code></h3>
<p>( constant width height x0 y0 x1 y1 op dst-bitmap – )</p>
<p>This draws a line with a rectangular pen of <em>width</em> and <em>height</em> with drawing operation <em>op</em> on <em>dst-bitmap</em> from (<em>x0</em>, <em>y0</em>) to (<em>x1</em>, <em>y1</em>) with the pen centered on the line using the <em>constant</em> value as used by <code class="docutils literal notranslate"><span class="pre">bitmap::draw-rect-const</span></code>. Note that the drawing operation <code class="docutils literal notranslate"><span class="pre">op-xor</span></code> is not recommended because it will most likely give undesirable results.</p>
</section>
<section id="draw-bitmap-line">
<h3><code class="docutils literal notranslate"><span class="pre">draw-bitmap-line</span></code></h3>
<p>( src-x src-y width height x0 y0 x1 y1 op src-bitmap dst-bitmap – )</p>
<p>This draws a line with the rectangle from (<em>src-x</em>, <em>src-y</em>) to (<em>src-x</em> + <em>width</em>, <em>src-y</em> + <em>height</em>) in <em>src-bitmap</em> as a pen with drawing operation <em>op</em> on <em>dst-bitmap</em> from (<em>x0</em>, <em>y0</em>) to (<em>x1</em>, <em>y1</em>) with the pen centered on the line. Note that the drawing operation <code class="docutils literal notranslate"><span class="pre">op-xor</span></code> is not recommended because it will most likely give undesirable results. The same may be true of <code class="docutils literal notranslate"><span class="pre">op-set</span></code> in some cases as well.</p>
</section>
<section id="draw-pixel-circle">
<h3><code class="docutils literal notranslate"><span class="pre">draw-pixel-circle</span></code></h3>
<p>( constant x y radius op dst-bitmap – )</p>
<p>This draws an unfilled pixel circle with drawing operation <em>op</em> on <em>dst-bitmap</em> centered at (<em>x</em>, <em>y</em>) with <em>radius</em> using the <em>constant</em> value as used by *bitmap::draw-pixel-const`.</p>
</section>
<section id="draw-rect-circle">
<h3><code class="docutils literal notranslate"><span class="pre">draw-rect-circle</span></code></h3>
<p>( constant width height x y radius op dst-bitmap – )</p>
<p>This draws an unfilled circle with a rectangular pen of <em>width</em> and <em>height</em> with drawing operation <em>op</em> on <em>dst-bitmap</em> centered at (<em>x</em>, <em>y</em>) with <em>radius</em> with the pen centered on the edge of the circle using the <em>constant</em> value as used by <code class="docutils literal notranslate"><span class="pre">bitmap::draw-rect-const</span></code>. Note that the drawing operation <code class="docutils literal notranslate"><span class="pre">op-xor</span></code> is not recommended because it will most likely give undesirable results.</p>
</section>
<section id="draw-bitmap-circle">
<h3><code class="docutils literal notranslate"><span class="pre">draw-bitmap-circle</span></code></h3>
<p>( src-x src-y width height x y radius op src-bitmap dst-bitmap – )</p>
<p>This draws an unfilled circle with the rectangle from (<em>src-x</em>, <em>src-y</em>) to (<em>src-x</em> + <em>width</em>, <em>src-y</em> + <em>height</em>) in <em>src-bitmap</em> as a pen with drawing operation <em>op</em> on <em>dst-bitmap</em> centered at (<em>x</em>, <em>y</em>) with <em>radius</em> with the pen centered on the edge of the circle. Note that the drawing operation <code class="docutils literal notranslate"><span class="pre">op-xor</span></code> is not recommended because it will most likely give undesirable results. The same may be true of <code class="docutils literal notranslate"><span class="pre">op-set</span></code> in some cases as well.</p>
</section>
<section id="draw-filled-circle">
<h3><code class="docutils literal notranslate"><span class="pre">draw-filled-circle</span></code></h3>
<p>( constant x y radius op dst-bitmap – )</p>
<p>This draws a filled pixel circle with drawing operation <em>op</em> on <em>dst-bitmap</em> centered at (<em>x</em>, <em>y</em>) with <em>radius</em> using the <em>constant</em> value as used by *bitmap::draw-pixel-const`.</p>
</section>
</section>
<section id="bitmap-lit">
<h2><code class="docutils literal notranslate"><span class="pre">bitmap-lit</span></code></h2>
<p>The <code class="docutils literal notranslate"><span class="pre">bitmap-lit</span></code> class contains the following words:</p>
<section id="begin-bitmap-lit">
<h3><code class="docutils literal notranslate"><span class="pre">begin-bitmap-lit</span></code></h3>
<p>( width height “name” – addr width height y line-addr )</p>
<p>Begin the definition of a bitmap literal.</p>
</section>
<section id="id1">
<h3><code class="docutils literal notranslate"><span class="pre">!!</span></code></h3>
<p>( addr width height y line-addr “pixels” – addr width height y line-addr )</p>
<p>Define a row of a bitmap literal; all characters until the end of the line above $20 are treated as 1 pixels, all characters until the end of the line from $20 and below are treated as 0 pixels, starting after a single character of whitespace after <code class="docutils literal notranslate"><span class="pre">!!</span></code>. Note that if the full width of the line is not defined the remaining pixels are set to 0.</p>
</section>
<section id="end-bitmap-lit">
<h3><code class="docutils literal notranslate"><span class="pre">end-bitmap-lit</span></code></h3>
<p>( addr width height y line-addr – )</p>
<p>End the definition of a bitmap literal. Any remaining undefined rows are set to 0.</p>
</section>
</section>
</section>


            <div class="clearer"></div>
          </div>
      </div>
      <div class="clearer"></div>
    </div>
  </body>
</html>