<!DOCTYPE html>

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
  <head>
    <meta charset="utf-8" />
    <meta name="viewport" content="width=device-width, initial-scale=1.0" /><meta name="viewport" content="width=device-width, initial-scale=1" />

    <title>Neopixels on the RP2040 and RP2350</title>
    <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../_static/pygments.css" />
    <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../_static/epub.css" /> 
  </head><body>

    <div class="document">
      <div class="documentwrapper">
          <div class="body" role="main">
            
  <section id="neopixels-on-the-rp2040-and-rp2350">
<h1>Neopixels on the RP2040 and RP2350</h1>
<p>There is optional support for Neopixels and Neopixel strips on the RP2040 and RP2350 using a PIO block to drive the Neopixel protocol.</p>
<p>Configuring the Neopixel is as simple as alloting a Neopixel data structure for a given number of Neopixels and initializing it with a Neopixel data GPIO pin, a Neopixel count, a PIO state machine index, and a PIO. Once one has done that, <code class="docutils literal notranslate"><span class="pre">neopixel!</span></code> can be used to specify the colors of individual Neopixels (with RGB colors, with each element having values from 0 to 255), and once the colors have been specified one transmits them to the Neopixel strip with <code class="docutils literal notranslate"><span class="pre">update-neopixel</span></code>.</p>
<p>Note that in some setups, such as the SeeedStudio XIAO RP2040, a separate GPIO pin may need to be set high to enable a Neopixel (e.g. GPIO pin 11 on the SeeedStudio XIAO RP2040, in addition to the data GPIO pin 12). Use the <code class="docutils literal notranslate"><span class="pre">pin!</span></code> word in the <code class="docutils literal notranslate"><span class="pre">pin</span></code> module for this.</p>
<p>Neopixel support is in <code class="docutils literal notranslate"><span class="pre">extra/rp_common/neopixel.fs</span></code>, which can be compiled either to RAM or to flash as needed.</p>
<section id="neopixel">
<h2><code class="docutils literal notranslate"><span class="pre">neopixel</span></code></h2>
<p>The <code class="docutils literal notranslate"><span class="pre">neopixel</span></code> module contains the following words:</p>
<section id="init-neopixel">
<h3><code class="docutils literal notranslate"><span class="pre">init-neopixel</span></code></h3>
<p>( state-machine pio count pin addr – )</p>
<p>Initialize a Neopixel structure at <em>addr</em> for <em>count</em> Neopixels, data GPIO pin <em>pin</em>, PIO block <em>pio</em>, and state machine <em>state-machine</em>. This does not take into account any power GPIO pin that may need to be configured. It reprograms the specified PIO block and assumes that it has full control over said block. Note that if <em>sm</em> and <em>pio</em> are both -1, they will be automatically assigned via the PIO pool; otherwise <em>sm</em> must be from 0 to 3 and <em>pio</em> must be one of <code class="docutils literal notranslate"><span class="pre">pio::PIO0</span></code>, <code class="docutils literal notranslate"><span class="pre">pio::PIO1</span></code>, or, on the RP2350, <code class="docutils literal notranslate"><span class="pre">pio::PIO2</span></code>.</p>
</section>
<section id="clear-neopixel">
<h3><code class="docutils literal notranslate"><span class="pre">clear-neopixel</span></code></h3>
<p>( neopixel – )</p>
<p>Clear all the Neopixel states in Neopixel structure <em>neopixel</em>.</p>
</section>
<section id="update-neopixel">
<h3><code class="docutils literal notranslate"><span class="pre">update-neopixel</span></code></h3>
<p>( neopixel – )</p>
<p>Transmit all the stored Neopixel color data for the Neopixels in Neopixel structure <em>neopixel</em>.</p>
</section>
<section id="id1">
<h3><code class="docutils literal notranslate"><span class="pre">neopixel!</span></code></h3>
<p>( red green blue index neopixel – )</p>
<p>Specify the color of Neopixel <em>index</em> in the Neopixel structure <em>neopixel</em> as <em>red</em>, <em>green</em>, and <em>blue</em> color components from 0 to 255. Note that this does <em>not</em> transmit the color data to the Neopixel in question; rather one must call <code class="docutils literal notranslate"><span class="pre">update-neopixel</span></code> to do so.</p>
</section>
<section id="id2">
<h3><code class="docutils literal notranslate"><span class="pre">neopixel&#64;</span></code></h3>
<p>( index neopixel – red green blue )</p>
<p>Get the color of Neopixel <em>index</em> in the Neopixel structure <em>neopixel</em> as <em>red</em>, <em>green</em>, and <em>blue</em> color components from 0 to 255.</p>
</section>
<section id="neopixel-size">
<h3><code class="docutils literal notranslate"><span class="pre">neopixel-size</span></code></h3>
<p>( count – bytes )</p>
<p>Get the size of a Neopixel structure in bytes with <em>count</em> Neopixels.</p>
</section>
<section id="x-out-of-range-neopixel">
<h3><code class="docutils literal notranslate"><span class="pre">x-out-of-range-neopixel</span></code></h3>
<p>( – )</p>
<p>Out of range Neopixel index exception.</p>
</section>
<section id="x-out-of-range-color">
<h3><code class="docutils literal notranslate"><span class="pre">x-out-of-range-color</span></code></h3>
<p>( – )</p>
<p>Out of range color component exception.</p>
</section>
</section>
</section>


            <div class="clearer"></div>
          </div>
      </div>
      <div class="clearer"></div>
    </div>
  </body>
</html>